The general good experience.
Can you describe what's going on with these M RNA viruses and how they
differ, excuse me,
M RNA vaccines and how they differ from a regular
vaccine and what what's coming down the pipe from Pfizer.
These are M RNA vaccines.
It's different in that it doesn't actually contain the virus,
but it boosts your body's ability to fight off the virus.
Yeah. So, um,
so there are many different ways of developing vaccines. Uh,
and the idea, the general idea behind a vaccine is,
is that we want to give you kind of an earth PSAT's infection.
We want to expose you make it as if you had been infected,
but without the risk of getting the disease to trick your immune system,
into mounting an immune response so that your body is then prepared.
If it gets the real infection to fight it off.
And one of the simplest ways you can think about it is so-called
live attenuated virus. This is an old technology where you,
you take the virus to the laboratory,
you culture it hundreds of times and hope for mutations that weaken the virus's
ability to make you sick. But nevertheless,
keep the virus able to elicit an immune response.
And then we give you that strain as a shot. And you have,
let's say a mild illness.
You develop antibodies and immunity and it's sustained,
or you can have inactivated virus, like one of the Chinese, the so-called,
the Sinovac vaccine that's enact was one of the first to start, uh, which was,
uh, out of China is a, is a live attenuated virus. So that is, uh,
Oh, I'm sorry. Did I say live attenuated already? I can't remember. But anyway,
the sign of back vaccine is a virus in which they, they take the virus.
I'm sorry. No, it's not like the previous example. In this case,
we take the virus and we treat it,
let's say with heat or with chemicals to kill the virus,
but still have it be immunogenic.
And that's another approach and there are many other approaches, a dozen or so,
or nine or 10 different approaches. One of which is this MRN a idea.
And here what is done is, um, so, so I'm sorry. Before I tell you about that,
another approach might be to take, take, uh,
the RNA from the Corona virus,
that codes for a very important protein,
despite protein on the surface of the Corona virus and insert that into a,
a really benign virus. Let's say like a cold virus, for example.
So we take this other species of virus.
We genetically engineer it so that we insert some, uh, materials,
some RNA into it. Let's say that forces that virus,
when it infects yourselves to give you a common cold,
but also to express this protein as if you had been infected with
COVID or Corona virus,
and then you Mount an immune system to that immune response to that protein,
and now you're immune.
So we gave you like a mild illness and we protected you from a more serious one.
The MRNs viruses are, uh, vaccines are sort of like that.
We inject you literally with, with, with RNA. And the idea is,
is that your cells take up the RNA and start making the protein,
the alien protein, uh,
that your body would have made.
Like if we had infected you with a real Corona virus,
the real code or own a virus, as many people remember from high school biology,
the virus can't reproduce on its own.
It inserts its genetic material into our cells,
which then start producing the viral, uh, the virus itself.
But now in a sense, instead of giving you the whole virus,
we give you a little part of it, just some part of his genetic material,
the RNA,
which in an ideal world does the same thing gets inserted into your cells.
You start expressing this protein,
which then your body attacks and you develop an immune response to it.
And we are amazingly lucky that, um,
that our scientists have been able to develop,
not one but two different vaccines and we'll have many other vaccines using
different modalities. I have no doubt that come out in the next year or two, uh,
but the modern and the Pfizer vaccines,
we're very lucky that they exist and that they are apparently quite effective,
but the S but the story's not over on those.
I don't know if you want to talk about that, but, but it's good news,
but I don't want people to get over optimistic either because you know,
it's my job to be a bit of a downer.
Well, the, this is the,
this is the unfortunate narrative that people keep saying. Uh,
the virus is killing.
It's like the average immune system is 99 point,
whatever percent effective in protecting you from the virus,
meaning 99 point,
whatever percent of the people who get the virus survive. Whereas.
99% Of people overall survive.
1% will die of all people who are infected approximately.
And if you're older than 70 or 80, 20% will die.
Why, why is the number that people keep talking about far less than that?
Why is the, the,
the reported number of people that get the virus who actually wind up dying?
It's it's not 1%, we're not,
we're not seeing 1% nationwide in terms of people getting the virus and dying.
You know, the answer to that question now,
I don't think there's any ambiguity scientifically. So, so, um, so in order to,
in order to really compute these numbers, it's not easy. You're right. Um,
we have to look at how many people,
we have to have a way of ascertaining who's infected.
And then we have to have a way of ascertaining of those, how many die and,
and, uh, and that's called the infection fatality rate.
And there was just a recent meta analysis looking at very good data from around
the world,
multiple studies using different approaches that estimated that the infection
fatality rate is between 0.5 and 0.8%.
And there's something called the case.
Fatality rate is the fraction of people who have symptoms,
who go when infected, who, and that number is about twice that,
so about half the people get the virus and have no symptoms at all.
So if you get symptoms, you have a higher risk of death.
And so you can double 0.5 to 0.8 becomes one to
1.6% of people who, um,
who develop symptoms from the disease die.
And there was another very good study that was just released a couple of weeks
ago that estimated the infection fatality rate to be about 1%.
So there's a lot of little numbers I've sorted out.
Right. But this is just his symptoms.
Yeah. But even without symptoms,
the infection fatality rate is certainly not less than half a percent and could
be as high as 1%. I would say, it's going to be in that range, the IFR,
the infection fatality, right.
Isn't there a large percentage of people that get it that don't have symptoms.
Half about half. We think that's right. Okay.
Of the people who get it don't have symptoms,
but you said 99 point something percent of people who get it survived.
And that point something is, is important.
So I would say that if you said 99.5% of the people who get
infected survive, I would say, yeah, it could be, but it's somewhere in there.
Right?
I mean, I don't think I gave a number. I think I said 99 point something,
but the point point being that, unfortunately,
a lot of people saying this vaccine is 94% effective
or 90% effective.
Yeah, yeah. Yeah. But that, what that means is, is that if you're, uh,
if it reduces your risk of death by that fraction. So for example,
in the vaccine trial, in the, uh, Pfizer trial, uh,
these numbers are approximate, uh, in that lead,
they had about 43,000 people in the trial. Half of them got the vaccine,
half of them did not. And in the people who got the vaccine,
nine people up to nine, let's say nine or 10 got,
even though they were vaccinated, still got Corona virus, still had the disease.
The vaccine was not perfect.
And in the people in the arm that did not get the vaccine,
the other 20,000 people let's say 90 people approximately
got coronavirus. So what the vaccine did is,
is it reduced your probability of getting the disease from 90 out of
20,000 people over the time window of the study to 10 out of
20,000 people. So the point here is, is that the, the,
the vaccine is reducing your risk of getting seriously ill if you're infected.
And, um, and it, and it's not, and you're certainly better off.
In other words, you would have had, let's say a 1% chance of dying, uh, before.
And now you have a point, 1% chance of dying 90% lower than that, because we,
you know, we've given you the vaccine. Does that mean.
Completely? I understand exactly what you're saying.
What I'm trying to say is there's an unfortunate narrative where people are
saying,
I'm not going to take a vaccine because the human immune system is more
effective than the vaccine. See, that's not true.
That's what I wanted to get out of you saying, yeah, go ahead.
Well, no,
I'm saying the vaccine the whole way vaccines vaccines work is that it enhances
your, your performance. You know, it's like a, it, it,
it stimulates your immune system to make it even better at fighting the,
the virus. There's,
there's no sense in which you could argue that an unchallenged immune system is
superior to a challenged immune system, a system that has been, you know,
been given a vaccine. So, um.
This is what's important to tell people, right?
Because this narrative of 99% of the people who get it,
99 point,
whatever your immune system is effective in fighting off this disease.
Whereas with the virus,
it's only 90 plus whatever percent effective in preventing the
virus. So this is not a, that's not a good narrative, correct.
That's right. And the way to think about it is just to pick some round numbers,
as you were saying, unlike, unlike, uh, like me,
you sometimes use the word virus when you mean vaccine and you used the word
vaccine when you mean virus. I'm sorry. I do that all the time. Yeah.
All the time. It's so annoying. Yeah. But anyway,
let's say for the sake of argument, you have an unvaccinated,
you have a 99% chance of surviving. If you get infected, right.
You have to add to that, the benefit of the vaccine, which is a 90%,
let's say effectiveness.
So it'll reduce your probability from 99% chance of
surviving to 99.9% chance.
Yes. Thank you. That's exactly what I wanted to get out of you there.
That when, when you talk about the people that took the vaccine,
and we know you have the data between the difference of the vaccine and the
people that got the placebo,
the people that got the vaccine that still wound up getting COVID,
did they do health screens on these people and find out what comorbidity
factors they may have had and see if there's anything that would indicate that
there's particular risks.
We don't know that yet those results haven't been released.
And also what we don't know. So we don't know the answer to that,
but we will know. And also what we don't know yet, as we,
we don't know how safe the vaccine is. So, first of all, just to be very clear,
both Pfizer and Moderna have released interim results.
And we have every reason to believe that the final efficacy results will be
about the same.
So as they complete the trial in the coming month or two and more people get
sick in both arms, we don't expect suddenly the vaccine not to work. I mean,
we've gotten to a point where it's,
we're pretty sure that the vaccine will be effective. And, um,
but we don't yet know the safety of the vaccine is one thing. We,
another thing we don't know, and we also don't know something else.
It's very important for people to understand again,
and since everyone needs to be an immunologist. Now
imagine that you're doing a trial and you're trying to see whether a vaccine
works or not. You have to define what counts as works,
what counts as an endpoint. So let me give you three possibilities.
One possibility is we're going to measure,
does the vaccine prevent you from even getting infected or does the vaccine
say you were not?
Or do we say the vaccine is not gonna be able to stop you from getting infected?
The virus is going to take root in your body,
but the vaccine is going to prevent the virus from making you seriously ill,
or do we say actually the outcome we really care about is death.
Does the virus reduce your probability of death?
So it's possible that the vaccine, for example,
might just to illustrate this point, prevent you from getting seriously ill,
but not reduce the probability of death. In other words, in the,
in the Pfizer trial that I just described to you with the knife in the,
in the vaccine arm, uh, 10 people got sick and in the non,
in the placebo arm, 90 people got sick. What if in both arms,
one person died. One out of the 10 in the vaccine arm died.
And one out of the 90 in the, in the other arm died,
we would say that the vaccine was effective at lowering your probability of
getting ill, which was great, but it had no effect on dying.
That's possible. It's possible that the vaccine will work at different,
uh, phases of the illness process.
And so the Pfizer trial revealed that there was a greatly reduced
probability of people getting infected.
The Moderna trial actually showed that its vaccine reduced the probability of
people getting seriously ill, which is great,
but it might in fact have no effect on mortality still. We don't know.
Furthermore, we also don't know whether this vaccine,
even if it works, reduces, reduce it.
Even if it works to reduce your probability of getting sick or dying,
whether it works to reduce your ability to infect other people. So,
so maybe we we've started vaccinating the population.
We're reducing the individual recipient's probability of getting sick,
but they still can spread the disease. So,
so this is something else that's not known. So we don't know the safety.
We don't know which outcomes are really being affected.
And we don't know if it affects infectiousness and all of these things are
things we will soon learn in the coming year, but we don't yet know them.
So I just, it's a fantastic news that we have a vaccine,
but I just don't want people to get think it's a panacea.
Episodes of the Joe Rogan experience are now free on Spotify. That's right.
They're free from September 1st to December 1st,
they're going to be available everywhere, but after December 1st,
they will only be available on Spotify, but they will be free.
That includes the video. The video will also be there. It'll also be free.
That's all we're asking. Just go download Spotify much. Buh-bye.